In the previous videos,
we've dealt with whole numbers
and also with single and double-precision numbers.
So, most recently, of course, we were dealing
with the floating point numbers.
In this video, we're going to talk about
two additional primitive types in Java,
the char, but also the Boolean primitive types.
Now, as you can see, I've already created
a new project on screen, and I've called it CharAndBoolean.
And I also used the create template option
so that we've got a class and a main method to use.
So, go ahead and do that now if you're following along.
So, I'm gonna start by deleting this comment.
And I'm gonna tab over and press enter there,
and you can see we've been indented by IntelliJ.
And let's define our first char variable.
So, I'm gonna type char, C-H-A-R,
space, my_char is equal to,
and then single quotes, and then the letter.
I'm gonna put the letter D there.
That could be any character, letter or number,
and other characters, like an exclamation mark,
a hash, an at sign, and so on.
And a semicolon to complete the line.
Now, the char is different to a string.
Now, if you recall in the previous videos you've seen,
we've used literal strings, and that's where
we've typed some text in double quotes.
We haven't really used a string variable yet,
but we'll be doing that in upcoming videos.
So, char is similar to the string in one sense
in that you can store characters.
But in this case, you can only store a single character.
So, if we go back and try and add a second character here,
like another D, you may not get an immediate error
until you press enter, but you can see there are now
too many characters in a character literal.
So, it is literally only allowing us
to actually save one character.
So, I'll just delete that to make it valid.
So, you might be wondering now, just how useful is it?
Why would you want to use a variable
that only allows you to store one character?
Well, one example might be to store
the last key pressed by a user in a game.
And it could be other scenarios where
you're just wanting to keep the last key pressed,
or just the last single digit that's been used
in a menu option, or something along those lines.
Now, chars were much more relevant
when Java was released in the late 1990s
compared to today, with much faster computers
that have got lots more memory.
So, in these days, you don't need
to focus so much on saving memory.
'Cause another good use for chars
would be to store data in arrays.
But again, we haven't talked about arrays yet in the course,
so we'll talk more about that a bit later.
For now, though, keep in mind that if you're going
to be using a char, you can literally only store
a single character in a single char variable.
Now, you might be looking at that thinking that,
okay, I can only save one character,
so therefore it must only occupy
a single byte in memory because it's, again,
one letter or digit, one character,
if you will, that can be stored in it.
Well, it turns out in terms of storage, that's not the case.
So, a char primitive type in Java occupies two bytes
of memory, or 16 bits, and thus has a width of 16.
And I know I've been talking about width in other videos.
The reason that it's not just a single byte
is that it allows you to store Unicode characters.
So, Unicode is an international encoding standard
for use with different languages and scripts
by which each letter, digit, or symbol
is assigned a unique numeric value
that applies across different platforms and programmes.
Now, in the English alphabet, we've got the letters
A through Z, meaning only 26 characters are needed in total
to represent the entire English alphabet.
But other languages need more characters,
and often a lot more.
Now, Unicode was developed to allow us
to represent these languages in a common way on computers.
So, the way that this work and equates back
to the char character in Java is that it uses
a combination of the two bytes
that it's taking up in memory,
and as a result, it can represent
any one of 65,535 different types of characters.
So, it's quite flexible with those two bytes.
So, to see that in operation,
let's swing back to our browser.
All right, so I'm gonna go to a website called
unicode-table.com.
All right, and you can see there
that we've got a lotta symbols on the screen.
And if I scroll down, I got some ads there as well,
unfortunately, but you can scroll down
and you can see there's lots of different symbols.
And these are all Unicode characters.
And you can see there's a staggering amount of them.
I would just give it time to load.
Pages and pages, and as I'm scrolling down,
that's actually generating more.
So, I'll go back up to the top again,
just to the first letters there
You'll notice that the letter D's on the screen there.
And notice that that's on the fourth row,
and it's actually starting on the fourth column.
So, to the left of that row containing the at sign
and A, B, C, D, notice that it's got 0040, and in the column
above the letter D, it's got the number four.
So, a Unicode character is comprised
of a code that we key into IntelliJ.
So, to do that now in this case,
we're going to type in 004.
And if we were using the at character,
we would leave it at zero, 'cause that would be 0040.
But because it's the D, we replace the zero,
this is the ending zero after 0040,
with the letter in the column for D.
So, you can see this at the top of the screen.
It's four.
So therefore the code we need is 0044.
So, if we go back into IntelliJ,
and we can actually type that Unicode character in.
So, we can type char myUnicode is equal to.
Now put the single quotes as we did before,
but this time, because we're putting in a Unicode character,
we need to put a \u and those four digits.
In this case, it was 0044.
All right, so then go to the end
of the line and press enter there.
Now we're going to print out the values.
So, let's do that.
We're doing a sout for myChar.
Then we're doing a sout again for myUnicode.
And let's actually run this programme
just to make sure that it's actually working okay.
Now, you can see there we've got D
printing out twice in our output window.
So clearly, the first representation on line seven
is for a letter D, and we typed that in,
but the Unicode character, if we were using
a Unicode convention to assign to our character,
is \u, which tells the Java compiler that it's
a Unicode character, and then the code
that you assume we come up with.
So, we've got the same result by doing that.
So, let's just find one other character
to make sure that it's working.
And we'll go back to our Unicode table.
And we'll come down here to this one here,
and you can see the row there with the copyright symbol.
So, let's grab the code for that one.
So, that's gonna be 00A.
And there's the nine, which is above the copyright.
So it's gonna be 00A9.
So, let's go back to our code again.
We'll define another one.
We'll do a char myCopyrightChar
is equal to, and we now single quotes,
semicolon to end the line.
And I'm going to do a \u00A9
at the end of the line.
And then we'll do an sout again, myCopyrightChar.
And let's see whether that works.
And there you can see on the screen
there the copyright character.
So, that's how to use Unicode if you're
wanting to put that into a char, like as we've done here.
And that's truly it for the char.
We'll talk more about this later
when we get to arrays, but for now,
if you're needing to use a char, that's how you use one.
And you now know also how to use Unicode.
All right, now the second variable
we wanna talk about is the Boolean.
So, a Boolean value allows for two choices,
true or false, yes or no, one or zero.
In Java terms, we've got a Boolean primitive type,
and it can be set to two values only, either true or false.
Now, Booleans are pretty useful in Java
and most programming languages,
and you will use them a lot when you're programming.
Now let's go back to the code.
So, what I'm gonna do now is create
a couple of Boolean variables.
Let's go ahead and do that.
So, I'm gonna type Boolean.
I'll call our first one myTrueBooleanValue.
And we'll assign that to be true.
And we just type true in lowercase with a lowercase T,
and into there, and we'll do the same on the next line,
myFalseBooleanValue is equal to false.
So, that can have one or two values,
either be true or either be false.
So, what would be a practical example
of using a Boolean in a programme?
Well, let's just say you wanted to know whether a particular
customer was either the age of 21 or not.
So, you might create a Boolean like this.
You type Boolean, and you'll type
the variable name to be a question.
So, you'd type Boolean_isCustomerOverEighteen.
Actually, I said 21, so let's go back and do that.
21.
So, isCustomerOverTwentyOne.
We're gonna assign that equal to true.
So, you can see there what we've done is,
the variable name is a question,
is the customer over 21, and we've assigned
the value of true to that, meaning that, of course,
in this particular case, the customer is over 21.
And again, you'll see that fairly often with Booleans.
They will use the word is and then a question
to make it very intuitive as to what
that variable is actually tracking.
And just a reminder that in general
with variable names, we'll be talking about those
and the right and best practises
for naming variables, classes, and methods as well.
But more on that when we get to that stage in the course.
And in terms of the Boolean, you'll see practical
applications for that primitive type
once we start tackling conditional logic.
All right, so that's the eight
primitive types we've now covered.
And in the next video, we're going to have
a bit of a recap of those eight data types.
So, you know already now that
they're called primitive types.
So, we're gonna go over them again in the next video
and then start discussing after that
a special data type in Java that's called a string.
Now, you've seen a literal value of a string,
and that's shown up whenever you've typed something
or seen me type something in double quotes.
That's a literal string.
But we're gonna start also working
with this data type string in more detail as well,
so actually creating variables of type string.
So, let's move on now to the next video.